Adventure 1, a scandal in Bohemia from the adventures of Sherlock Holmes by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.
This is a Librivox recording.
All Librivox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information or to volunteer, please visit Librivox.org.
Recording by Ruth Golding.
A scandal in Bohemia.
To Sherlock Holmes she is always the woman.
I have seldom heard him mention her under any other name.
In his eyes she eclipses and predominates the whole of her sex.
It was not that he felt any emotion akin to love for Irene Adler.
All emotions and that one particularly were apparent to his cold, precise, but admirably
balanced mind.
He was, I take it, the most perfect reasoning and observing machine that the world has seen.
But as a lover he would have placed himself in a false position.
He never spoke of the softer passions, save with a jive and a snare.
They were admirable things for the observer.
And for drawing the veil from men's motives and actions.
But for the trained reasoner to admit such intrusions into his own delicate and finally
adjusted temperament was to introduce a distracting factor, which might throw a doubt upon all
his mental results.
Grit in a sensitive instrument or a crack in one of his own high power lenses would not
be more disturbing than a strong emotion in a nature such as his.
And yet there was but one woman to him.
And that woman was the late Irene Adler of dubious and questionable memory.
I had seen little of Holmes lately.
My marriage had drifted us away from each other.
My own complete happiness and the home-centered interests which rise up around the man who first
finds himself master of his own establishment were sufficient to absorb all my attention.
While Holmes, who loathed every form of society with his whole behemian soul, remained in our
lodgings in Baker Street, buried among his old books, and alternating from week to week
between cocaine and ambition.
The drowsiness of the drug and the fierce energy of his own keen nature.
He was still as ever deeply attracted by the study of crime and occupied his immense
faculties and extraordinary powers of observation in following up those clues and clearing up
those mysteries which had been abandoned as hopeless by the official police.
Some time to time I heard some vague account of his doings.
Of his summons to a deser in the case of the Trepoff murder.
Of his clearing up off the singular tragedy of the Atkinson brothers at Trinkham-Ali.
And finally of the mission which he had accomplished so delicately and successfully for the reigning
family of Holland.
Beyond these signs of activity however which I merely shared with all the readers of the
Daily Press I knew little of my former friend and companion.
One night it was on the 20th of March 1888.
I was returning from a journey to a patient, for I had now returned to civil practice,
when my way led me through Baker Street.
As I passed the well-remembered door which must always be associated in my mind with my
wooing, and with the dark incidence of the study in Scarlet, I was seized with a keen
desire to see Holmes again, and to know how he was employing his extraordinary powers.
His rooms were brilliantly lit, and even as I looked up I saw his tall spare figure pass
twice in a dark silhouette against the blind.
He was pacing the room swiftly, eagerly, with his head sunk upon his chest, and his
hands clasped behind him.
To me who knew his every mood and habit his attitude and manner told their own story.
He was at work again.
He had risen out of his drug-created dreams and was hot upon the scent of some new problem.
I rang the bell, and was shown up to the chamber which had formerly been in part my own.
His manner was not effusive, it seldom was, but he was glad, I think, to see me.
With hardly a word spoken but with a kindly eye he waived me to an armchair through across
his case of cigars and indicated a spirit-case and a gazegine in the corner.
When he stood before the fire and looked me over in his singular introspective fashion.
I'd lock suits you, he remarked.
I think Watson had to have put on seven and a half pounds since I saw you.
Seven, I answered.
Indeed I should have thought a little more.
That trifle more I fancy Watson.
And in practice again I observed.
You did not tell me that you intended to go into Honis?
Then how did you know?
I see it, I deduce it.
How do I know that you have been getting yourself very wet lately?
And that you have a most clumsy and careless servant girl?
My dear Holmes said, I, this is too much.
You would certainly have been burned had you lived a few centuries ago?
It is true that I had a country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess, but as I have
changed my clothes I can't imagine how you deduce it.
I asked Mary Jane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her notice, but there again
I fail to see how you work it out.
She chuckled to himself and rubbed his long nervous hands together.
"'It is simplicity itself,' said he.
"'My eyes tell me that on the inside of your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes
it, the leather is scored by six almost parallel cuts.'
Obviously there have been cause by someone who has very carelessly scraped around the
edges of the soul in order to remove, crust it mud from it.
Hence, you see my double deduction that you had been out in vile weather, and that you
had a particularly malignant, boot-slitting specimen of the London Slavery.
As to your practice, if the gentleman walks into my room smelling a biode of form, with
a black mark of nitrate of silver upon his right forefinger, and a bulge on the right
side of his top hat, to show where he has secreted his death as scope, I must be dull,
indeed, if I do not pronounce him to be an active member of the medical profession.
I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained his process of deduction.
When I hear you give your reasons, I remarked, the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculously
simple that I could easily do it myself.
Though at each successive instance of your reasoning I am baffled until you explain
your process, and yet I believe that my eyes are as good as yours.
Quite so, he answered, lighting a cigarette and throwing himself down into an armchair.
You see, but you do not observe, the distinction is clear.
For example, you have frequently seen the steps which lead up from the hall to this room.
Frequently?
How often?
Well, some hundreds of times.
Then how many are there?
How many?
I don't know.
Quite so.
You have not observed.
And yet you have seen?
That is just my point.
Now, I know that there are seventeen steps, because I have both seen and observed.
By the way, since you are interested in these little problems, and since you are good enough
to chronicle one or two of my trifling experiences, you may be interested in this.
He threw over a sheet of thick, pink tinted note paper which had been lying open upon the
table.
It came by the last post, said he.
Read it aloud.
The note was undated and without either signature or address.
There will call upon you tonight at a quarter to eight o'clock, it said.
A gentleman who desires to consult you upon a matter of the very deepest moment.
More recent services to one of the royal houses of Europe have shown that you are one who
may safely be trusted with matters which are of an importance which can hardly be exaggerated.
This account of you we have from all quarters received.
Be in your chamber then at that hour, and do not take it a miss if you are visitor where
a mask.
This is indeed a mystery, I remarked.
What do you imagine that it means?
I have no data yet.
It is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data.
Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories, instead of theories to suit facts.
But the note itself, what do you deduce from it?
I carefully examined the writing and the paper upon which it was written.
The man who wrote it was presumably well to do.
I remarked, endeavouring to imitate my companion's processes.
Such paper could not be bought under half a crown of packet.
It is peculiarly strong and stiff.
Peculiar, that is the very word, said Holmes.
It is not an English paper at all, hold it up to the light.
I did so, and saw a large E with a small G, a P and a large G with a small T, woven into
the texture of the paper.
What do you make of that?
Asked Holmes.
The name of the maker, no doubt, or his monogram, rather.
Not at all the G with a small T stands for gazelle shaft, which is the German for company.
It is a customary contraction like our coat.
P, of course, stands for papyr.
Now for the E G.
Let us glance at our continental gazette.
He took down a heavy brown volume from his shells.
Egg, gloth, egg, glonet.
Here we are, egg, ria.
It is in a German-speaking country, in Bohemia, not far from Karlsberg.
Remarkable as being the scene of the death of Valenstein, and for its numerous glass factor
isn't paper mills.
Aha, my boy, what do you make of that?
His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great blue triumphant cloud from his cigarette.
"'Nurk' paper was made in Bohemia,' I said, precisely.
And the man who wrote the note is a German.
Do you note the peculiar construction of the sentence?
This account of you we have from all quarters received.
A Frenchman or Russian could not have written that.
It is the German who is so uncurtious to his verbs.
It only remains, therefore, to discover what is wanted by this German who writes upon
Bohemia and paper and prefers wearing a mask to showing his face.
And here he comes, if I am not mistaken, to resolve all our doubts.
As he spoke there was the sharp sound of horses hoofs and grating wheels against the curb,
followed by a sharp pull at the belt, Holmes whistled.
"'A pair by the sound,' said he.
"'Yes,' he continued to glance-sing out of the window.
A nice little brum and a pair of beauties.
A hundred and fifty-geneers a piece.
There's money in this case Watson if there is nothing else.'
"'I think that I had better go, Holmes.'
"'Not a bit, Doctor.
Stay where you are.
I am lost without my Boswell.
And this promise is to be interesting.
It would be a pity to miss it.'
"'Burt your client?'
Never mind him.
I may want your help and so may he.'
"'Here he comes.
Sit down in that armchair, Doctor, and give us your best attention.'
A slow and heavy step which had been heard upon the stairs and in the passage paused immediately
outside the door.
Then there was a loud and authoritative tap.
"'Come in,' said Holmes.
A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet six inches in height, with
the chest and limbs of a hercules.
His dress was rich with a richness which would in England be looked upon as a kind of
bad taste.
Heavy bands of astrakhan were slashed across the sleeves and fronts of his double-breasted
coat, while the deep blue cloak which was thrown over his shoulders was lined with
flame-coloured silk, and secured at the neck with a brooch which consisted of a single
flaming barrel.
Boots which extended halfway up his calves and which were trimmed at the tops with rich
brown fur completed the impression of barbaric opulence which was suggested by his whole appearance.
He carried a broad brimmed hat in his hand, while he wore across the upper part of his
face, extending down past the cheekbones, a black visored mask which he had apparently
adjusted that very moment for his hand was still raised to it as he entered.
From the lower part of the face he appeared to be a man of strong character, with a thick
hanging lip and a long straight chin suggestive of resolution pushed to the length of obstinacy.
You're hard to my note!
He asked with a deep harsh voice and a strongly marked German accent.
I told you that I've had core.
He looked from one to the other of us as if uncertain which to address.
«Braid take a seat,' said Holmes.
This is my friend and colleague Dr. Watson, who is occasionally good enough to help me
in my cases.
Whom have I the honour to address?
You may address me as the Count von Kahn, a Bohemian noble man.
I understand that this gentleman, your friend, is a man of honour and discretion, whom I may
test with a matter of the most extreme importance.
If not, I should much prefer to communicate with you alone.
I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me back into my chair.
"'It is both so none,' said he.
You may say before this gentleman anything which you may say to me.'
The Count shrugged his broad shoulders.
"'Then I must begin,' said he, by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years.
At the end of that time the matter will be of no importance.
At present it is not too much to say that it is of such a weight it may have an influence
upon European history.
"'I promise,' said Holmes, "'and I,' you will excuse this mask,' continued our strange
visitor.
The Auguste-Parson who employs me, this is his agent to be unknown to you.
And I may confess advance that the title by which I have just called myself is not exactly
my own.'
"'I was aware of it,' said Holmes, dryly.
The circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precaution has to be taken to crunch
what might go to be an immense scungle and seriously compromise one of the reigning families
of Europe.
To speak plenty the matter implicates the great house of Ormstein, heradetry kings of Bohemia.
"'I was also aware of that,' murmured Holmes, settling himself down in his armchair and
closing his eyes.
Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at the languid, lounging figure of the man
who had been no doubt depicted to him as the most incisive reasoner and most energetic
agent in Europe.
Holmes slowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at his gigantic client.
"'If your majesty would condescend to state your case,' he remarked, "'I should be
better able to advise you.'
The man sprang from his chair and paced up and down the room in uncontrollable agitation.
Then with a gesture of desperation he tore the mask from his face and hurled it upon the
ground.
"'You are I'd,' he cried, "'I am the king.
Why should I attempt to conceal it?'
"'I indeed,' murmured Holmes.
Your majesty had not spoken before I was aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottzreich
Sigis Mond von Ormstein, Grand Duke of Castle Felstein and hereditary king of Bohemia.
"'But you can understand,' said a strange visitor, sitting down once more and passing
his hand over his high white forehead.
"'You can understand that I am not accustomed to doing such business in my own person.
Yet the matter was so delicate that I could not confide it to an agent without putting
myself in his power.
I have come incognito from Prague for the purpose of consulting you.'
"'Then pray consult,' said Holmes, shutting his eyes once more.
The facts are briefly these.
Some five years ago, during a lengthy visit to Warsaw, I made a acquaintance of the well-known
adventurice, Irene Adler.
Her name is no doubt familiar to you.'
Kindly look her up in my index, Doctor.
Murmord Holmes, without opening his eyes.
For many years he had adopted a system of docketing all paragraphs concerning men and things,
so that it was difficult to name a subject or a person on which he could not at once
furnish information.
In this case I found her biography sandwiched in between that of a Hebrew rabbi and that
of a staff commander who had written a monograph upon the deep sea fishes.
"'Let me see,' said Holmes.
"'Mmm, born in New Jersey in the year 1858.
Contralto.
La Scala.
Prima Donna Imperial Opera of Warsaw, yes.
Retired from operatic stage?
Ah, living in London, quite so.
Your majesty, as I understand, became entangled with this young person.
Wrote her some compromising letters, and is now desirous of getting those letters back.
Preciously so.
But how?
Was there a secret marriage?
None.
No legal papers or certificates.
Then I failed to follow your majesty.
If this young person should produce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how
is she to prove their authenticity?
There is writing.
Puff, forgery.
My private note paper.
Stolen.
My own seal.
Immitated.
My photograph.
Bought.
The above both in the photograph.
Oh dear.
That is very bad.
Your majesty has indeed committed an indiscretion.
I was mad in saying.
You have compromised yourself seriously.
I was only calm, Princeton.
I was young.
I am at thirty now.
It must be recovered.
If you have tied and failed.
Your majesty must pay.
It must be bought.
She will not sell.
Stolen then.
Five attempts have been made.
Twice burglars in my pay ransacked her house.
Once they diverted her luggage when she travelled.
Twice she has been veiled.
There has been no result.
No sign of it.
Absolutely none.
Holmes laughed.
It is quite a pretty little problem, said he.
What a very serious one to me, returned the king reproachfully.
Very indeed, and what does she propose to do with the photograph?
To ruin me.
But how?
I am about to be married.
So I have heard.
To clothe tilde Lortmann, Fond Sucks, Minning and second daughter of the King of Scandinavia.
You may know the strict principles of her family.
She is herself the very soul of delicacy.
A shadow of a doubt has to my conduct would bring the matter to an end.
And Rainy Adler?
Threatens to send them the photograph, and she will do it.
I know that she will do it.
You do not know her, but she has a soul of steel.
She has the face of the most beautiful women, and the mind of the most isolated Lortmann.
Rather than I should marry another woman, there are no lengths to which she would not go
none.
You are sure that she has not sent it yet?
I am sure.
And why?
Because she has said that she would send it on the day when the betrothal was publicly
proclaimed.
That will be next Monday.
Oh, then we have three days yet.
Said Holmes with a yawn.
That is very fortunate as I have one or two matters of importance to look into just
at present.
Your Majesty will, of course, stay in London for the present.
Certainly.
You will find me at the langum under the name of the Count Fond Corm.
Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress.
Pray do so.
I shall be all anxiety.
Then as to money, you have carte blanche.
Absolutely.
I tell you that I could give one of the provinces of my kingdom to have that photograph.
And for present expenses.
The king took a heavy chamileather bag from under his cloak and laid it on the table.
There are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in notes, he said.
Holmes scribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his notebook and handed it to him.
And Mamm Zell's address, he asked, is Brianny Lodge serpentine Avignon St. John's
Wood?
Holmes took a note of it.
One other question, said he.
Was the photograph a cabinet?
It was.
Then good night, Your Majesty.
And I trusted we shall soon have some good news for you.
And good night Watson.
He added as the wheels of the Royal Brom rolled down the street.
If you will be good enough to call tomorrow afternoon at three o'clock, I should like
to chat this little matter over with you.
End of part one of Adventure One, a scandal in Bohemia.